---
layout: post
title: 'Bad start'
categories: coding cpp
---

Regard classes with start and stop methods with suspicion


# Init method in a sheep's clothing

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
class some_class {
public:
  void start() {
    // ...
  }

  void stop() {
    // ...
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

Innocent classes with `start` and `stop` methods are looking for trouble. They
are just aliases for classes with `init` and `cleanup` methods. Or they came
with different names (`setup` and `teardown` are popular with test frameworks)

They raise questions like:

- how does the user of the class ensure `stop` is always called?
- how do the constructor and `start` divide the responsibility to initialize?
- if `start` fails (e.g. throws), is then `stop` also called?
- what happens if `stop` throws?
- how do the destructor and `stop` divide the responsibility to cleanup?

Some people think they have obvious answers to the above questions, but the
more you dig, the less palatable the outcomes.

To pick just the first question, here is a potential (bad) answer:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
void some_fn() {
  some_class a;
  bool need_to_stop = true;
  try
  {
    a.start();
    // ...
    need_to_stop = true;
    a.stop();
  }
  catch(...)
  {
    if (need_to_stop) {
      a.stop();
    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Compare that with using constructor/destructor (even with a complex
initialization):

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
void some_fn() {
  some_class a = complex_initialization_fn();
  // ...
}
{% endhighlight %}


# So what's the solution?

Don't use classes with `start`/`stop` methods.


# But I have to use a start method

Say you're dealing with legacy code e.g. using a test framework with `setup`
and `teardown`. Then the solution of containment might work. See
[here for how to bridge to using the standard C++ lifetime
workflow][avoid-too-many].


# But I really have to use a start method

For example to fix [this threading bug][threading-bug]. There we have base
class `periodic_thread` that might call a method of the derived class
`on_fire`, from a different thread, before the derived class
`some_periodic_thread` virtual table was initialized.

The naive solution is to defer starting the thread in a `start` method for the
`periodic_thread` class. In addition to the problems mentioned above, this
approach spreads. The derived class `some_periodic_thread` needs to have a
`start` method, and it's usage in a function is more complex.

Whenever you use the class you need additional work whenever it is used, either
directly in a function, or when aggregated either as a member or as a base
class.

For an alternative, look at the `std::thread` class. It does not have
`start`/`stop`. Instead, it receives the things it needs (e.g. the function to
call), in the constructor. That means that natural usage requires that the
scope of the function to call from the thread will extend the life of the
`std::thread` instance.


[avoid-too-many]: {% post_url 2018-09-17-avoid-too-many-smart-pointers %}
[threading-bug]:  {% post_url 2015-04-08-threading-bug %}

