---
layout: post
title: 'Books Read in 2018'
categories: read book
---

List of books I've read in 2018

- 2018-06-10 - James Comey: A Higher Loyalty

- 2018-06-01 - Steven Pinker: Enlightenment Now
: Very good book 10 out of 10 [see review][s-pinker-enlightenment-now]

- 2018-05 - Francis-Noël Thomas and Mark Turner: Clear and simple as the
  truth
: Definition of style of writing as deep attitudes with regards to truth and
the relationship between the writer and the reader. Presents the classic style
as one where the writer has something meaningful to say, assumes that the truth
can be presented, and that the reader will recognise.

- 2018-04 - Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt: How Democracies Die
: Two guys specialist on malfunctions of democracies (one in South America
ones, the other in Easter Europe ones) said to each other: with Trump now we
can apply the same to US. In a democratic regime the powers (e.g. executive,
legislative, judiciary) restrain from using the full power of the law (e.g.
Congress does not remove the president just because it has the majority to do
so). The US politics have become polarized long before Trump.

- 2018-04 Keith Hitchins: Românii. 1774-1866
: Romanian history by an American. Covers about a century up to shortly after
the Union Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. OK, but not as incisive as
the works of Lucian Boia. Among other pieces of info: how small the population
was, in particular in cities, how production of wheat was taken by the Turks,
hence peasants were keen to plant other things like corn, why the national
ideology about the Roman and Dacian origin (Roman provide reputation whereas
Dacian extends timelines). Funny fact: aristocracy (boyars) tried at some point
to define the day of work the serfs were obliged to provide to be longer than
an actual day.

- 2018-03 - Simon A. Herbert: Reason in Human Affairs
: Great insight on how we take decisions.

- 2018-02 - Chip and Dan Heath: Made to Stick

- 2018-01 - Lucian Boia: Mitologia ştiinţifică a comunismului
: There is nothing scientific about communism/marxism.

- 2018-01 Carlo M. Cipolla: The Basic Laws of Human Stupidity
: Tongue and cheek essay on human stupidity e.g. "Always and inevitably
everyone underestimates the number of stupid individuals in circulation."

[s-pinker-enlightenment-now]:  {% post_url 2018-05-03-enlightenment-now-s-pinker %}
