---
layout: post
title: 'Books Read in 2019'
categories: read book
---

List of books I've read in 2019

- 2019-02-08: articles on unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics
: See [reading notes][effectiveness]. Hamming's one is particularly
interesting.

- 2019-02-06: N. Wirth: Programming Development by Stepwise Refinement / Communications of the ACM, Vol. 14, No. 4, p221-227, April 1971.
: Not a book, an article. Describes the eight queens problem. OK-ish.

- 2019-01-21: Edsger W. Dijkstra: The Humble Programmer / ACM Turing Lecture 1972
: Not a book, an article. Gem about the nature of developing software. See
[reading-notes][humble]. Good.

- 2019-01-18 - Hans Rosling: Factfulness
: In style of Stephen Pinker's [Enlightenement
Now][s-pinker-enlightenment-now], it's data supporting a view of the world such
that the world is improving and it is possible to improve further. It describes
a yardstick measure of life at four income levels. It describes the gap
instinct of expecting to identify clear boundaries between categories where in
reality things are murky and conflated. Also why war zone immigrants arrive in
inflatable boats: because regulation prevents them to fly, which costs less,
and the better boats get confiscated at arrival. Difficulty rating: 30 pages
per evening.

- 2019-01-18 Donald E. Knuth: Structured Programming with go to Statements / Computing Surveys, Vol. 6, No. 4, December 1974
: Not a book, a long-ish article, but full of gems including "Premature
optimisation is the root of all evil" and "people have a natural tendency to
set up all easily understood quantitative goal [...] instead of working
directly for a qualitative goal". See [reading notes][premature-optimisation].
Difficulty rating: 6 pages per evening.

NOTE: Some books are rated for difficulty. That's an estimation of pages I can
read in a work day evening (after putting children to bed, dinner, catch-up
with The Important One, etc.). An easy read equates to more pages per evening,
a difficult read equates to less pages.

[effectiveness]: {% post_url 2019-02-08-unreasonable-effectiveness %}
[humble]: {% post_url 2019-01-21-humble-programmer %}
[premature-optimisation]: {% post_url 2019-01-18-premature-optimisation %}
[s-pinker-enlightenment-now]: {% post_url 2018-05-03-enlightenment-now-s-pinker %}
