---
layout: post
title: 'Keyboards'
categories: coding tools
---

Survey of the available keyboards on the market; for the coder.


The keyboard at work, which I had for a while (many years), does not feel
right.  It feels like I have to press it all the way to the bottom where it
feels like a spongy, but relatively hard rubber, with no clear tactile feedback
as to when the key was registered. Therefore I end up pressing hard on the
keys, which takes it toll after a while.

Newer keyboards around the office, are similar or worse. It turns out that most
of the keyboards nowadays are rubber dome keyboards. They have the advantage
that they are cheap and relatively silent. They compromise on how it feels,
though I'll admit: how it feels is subjective.

So, are there better keyboards available?

First there is a flood of keyboards for the gaming market. They can be
instantly recognised by the focus on lightning and lightning customisation. A
further search shows that there keyboards mainly by the same manufacturers that
target coders. Most of them are based on Cherry MX switches (or clones of). I
tried a couple of them and they do feel different, from the membrane, but they
don't feel better. At least after some use they have a scratchy feel as you
press the key, and the tactile feedback is not much better. Costs are around
the £100 mark.

Then there is a huge enthusiast community around custom keyboards. Costs are
around the £300 mark. A wide range of key layouts and key caps are available.
Unfortunately it's centered around the same switches.

Then there are the old good buckling spring keyboards. I tried an old IBM one
and [it just feels right][unicomp-review]. They are still manufactured by a
company named Unicomp. They sell around the £100 mark. The downsides are the
loud sound, and the very limited range of layouts. The advantage is the feel of
the switch type and the ergonomic sculptured layout of key rows.

I think I'm going to give it a try.

[unicomp-review]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-A-vRZth7SI

