---
layout: post
title: 'Books Read in 2020'
categories: read book
---

List of books I've read in 2020

- 2020-12-28 Hermann Weyl: Mathematics and Logic - A brief survey serving as preface to a review of The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell 1946
: Good summary of the state of the foundations of maths in 1946

- 2020-12-19 Charles Duhigg: The power of Habit - Why we do what we do and how to change
: OKish book, journalist style, interesting stories, but not very deep. Also
the religious references were a bit off-putting and intellectually
questionable.

- 2020-12-15 J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone
: Oh well, a quick read. Very colourful.

- 2020-12-13 John Brooks: Business Adventures - Twelve Classic Tales from the World of Wall Street
: Lovely told business stories from the 60s. E.g. the story of the managers
that always winked when telling employees to obey regulation. It's so
interesting how some of them have the knack to repeat in history e.g. "The last
great corner" was what happened when dealers shorting Volkswagen could not
purchase the shares back and had to make a deal with Porsche which owned most
shares. Also the fate of the pound from the last story.

- 2020-10-14 Seth Gilbert & Nancy Lynch: Brewer’s Conjecture and the Feasibility of Consistent, Available, Partition-Tolerant Web Services
: aka. the CAP theorem proof. Not impressed. Clearly the CAP conjecture is an
important observation on the limits of distributed systems, but the paper does
not do justice to the issue. The paper avoids clear explanations. On the
surface it aims to be precise, but it's not. Sometimes it uses particular
models, not clear how realistic they are. By he end of the paper there is still
no clear definition for the core issues of consistency, availability, partition
tolerance.

- 2020-08-27: Christopher Olah: [Understanding LSTM Networks](https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/)
: Also read the paper by Ashish Vaswani et al: Attention Is All You Need. Good
intro to recurrent neural networks.

- 2020-06-22 M. G. Kains: Five Acres and Independence
: Advice from 1935, during Great Depression, with advice for town people moving
to the country to set up a farm. Very easy read.

- 2020-05-27 John Harrison: Vegetable Growing Month by Month
: Grow your own veg for when they're not available in shops. Good. Easy read.

- 2020-01-04 James Morton: Super Sourdough
: Bread making book. OK.

