---
layout: post
title: "IM reading notes"
categories: review book
---

Reading notes for Stephen Cole Kleene: Introduction to Metamathematics (Ishi
Press: 2009 reprint)

# Motivation

Why did I choose this book
- undestand Goedel's incompleteness theorem
  - because of it's ramnifications on the limits of a formal system
  - and potential implications on: is there a single best way to program?
- undestand core mathematical concepts such as consistency, completeness,
  recursion
- and implication on decision e.g.
  - it might be theoretically impossible, but practically it's not an issue: if
    we can't decide in the available time, we'll change the solution

I really like the style of this book: it's a classic style similar to "Elements
of Programming" where things are told clearly (albeit the subject is difficult,
clearly does not make it trivially easy) and it seems sound, details are
analysed precisely (e.g. under which circumstances we can elide parentheses and
why, with proof).


# Suitability of propositional calculus

On the interpretation of the propositional calculus (p138), he shows that it,
the propositional calculus, is a suitable logical instrument when the
propositions are (or we make the assumption that they are) definitely either
true or false.

For the deduction below:

1. It is rainy (first assumption)
2. If it is rainy then I'll carry an umbrella (second assumption)
3. I'll carry an umbrella (By applying rule 2 on propositions 1 and 2)

The issue is that with for example the first proposition, there will be cases
where it definitely is rainy (and also cases when it definitely is not rainy),
but there are also ambiguous cases. How do we establish if it's raining? How
long are we going to wait to determine if it's raining? In practice we accept
that there will be situations where it actually did rain, but was not protected
by an umbrella. And the fault rests with applying the propositional calculus
where it was not a perfect match.


# The meaning of natural numbers

The book starts with a beautiful observation (p1) about us humans finding
something in common between four sheep and four trees that is different to a
pile of three stones or a grove of seven trees. In that context he refers to
cardinal number (i.e. number representing the size of a set). But it also opens
the door for an understanding of what natural numbers are.

I hold the view that numbers are human inventions, they don't exist in some
metaphysical absolute space for us to discover. Human not in the absolute sense
that other species could not contemplate the idea of number, on the contrary,
our nervous system is similar to other species, we might have taken the idea of
number to another level, but I would not be surprised if other species would be
able to react to one, two, many. It comes from the nervous system making
correlations, finding similarities in order to make predictions. In practice
when doing maths it's quite useful to assume and talk about numbers as if they
exist.

But like in the propositional calculus discussion above, the numbers are likely
suitable for cases where we can identify clearly distinct entities, and not so
directly applicable when that's not the case. Some of Zeno's paradoxes really
expose the unsuitability of representing distance of something that can be
divided exactly forever, in practice we arrive at atomic levels where due to
particles and uncertainty that is not the case, the human scale experience of
continuous space/real numbers/euclidian geometry is incorrect at a certain
physical low level.


# Adding new axioms impacts subsidiary deductions rules

A direct deduction rule remains correct when a system is extended by adding new
axioms (p94). That's because a direct deduction rule only states that certain
deduction can be constructed and new axioms only change the situation by
providing additional means of constructing the same deduction.

But for for a rule that employs a subsidiary deduction, such as the deduction
theorem, adding new axioms can create cases of subsidiary deductions and raise
the question if they can be matched in the resulting deduction (p95).

That's why the deduction theorem is proved for propositional logic, but when
the system is extended to predicate logic the proof needs to be revisited.


# Decision

The ideas for decision problems are not so unusual. For example the determinant
of a matrix is so called because it determines if a set of linear equations has
a unique solution. Calculating the determinant answers the question without
providing the solution of the set of equations.


# Difficult points

- M ~ N1 in N p10 : M has the same cardinality of N1 which is a subset of N
- intuitionism, naming: it's not about intuition in general, specific
  constructive ideas can be identified
- lack of explaining of resolutions of the paradoxes
- the induction on the deduction theorem proof (re-using B)
- a lot to go through the formal system without interpretation and or
  explanation/motivation for the choice of axioms
- a lot of fine points "free for", "dependence", "variance" etc. for the
  predicate logic, difficult to get without interpretation
