---
layout: post
title: 'Books Read in 2021'
categories: read book
---

List of books I've read in 2021

- 2021-08-14 Marcus Aurelius: Meditations
: Lovely insight into the stoic thinking. Roughly that word is made out of
earth, water, air and fire, that somehow it has purpose, that gods exists, that
we have soul and that our purpose is to do good and justice for the benefit of
all. Ironically, though not Christian, you can see the roots of some Christian
ideas. He had 14 children, of which half died early in childhood, a mark of the
times where even a Roman emperor had to suffer that.

- 2021-08-03 Richard Dawkins: The Selfish Gene
: The book that coined the term meme. Most of the book though is an accessible
argument that evolution relies on selection at gene level (e.g. not at group
level). Interesting examples of how complex behaviour (deception, altruism)
could emerge: e.g. hawks and doves, but it's more like modelling rather than
explaining. Likes argument for the argument's sake. The "selfish" part is at
odds with the variations in nature. Anthropomorphism a bit over used. Also a
bit obsessed with refuting religion (that's too easy of a target). I might
sound critical about it, though actually it's a book that I would recommend
reading.

- 2021-07-21 Stephen M. R. Covey: The Speed of Trust
: Full of fluff and overly verbose as if written by a "management consultant"
paid by the hour, which probably is his career. In the first 100 pages there
was half of page mildly interesting. Gave up. Lots of metaphoric terms usage in
the style of horoscopes that are true in some sense, but meaningless "Nothing
is as fast as the speed of trust" (the speed of light in void, duh?).  Random
quotes, someone said this and that, without context.  "Research shows" again
without context. Rubbish.

- 2021-07-11 Lucian Boia: Balcic - Micul paradis al României Mari
: Interesting, though overly royalty centred history

- 2021-07-09 Hannah Fry and Thomas Oléron Evans: The Indisputable Existence of Santa Claus
: Intended to be light funny maths. Too light. Not recommended. It does mention
Euclid though.

- 2021-05-30 C. Northcote Parkinson: Parkinson's Law (or the pursuit of progress)
: Finally I traced the story about bike-shedding.

- 2021-05-30 C. Northcote Parkinson: In-laws and Outlaws
: It would be funny advice if it would not be so sexist.

- 2021-02-21 Matt Parker: Humble Pi
: Easy math errors read. The interesting part was about non-transitive odds on
coin sequences.

- 2021-02-14 Apostolos Doxiadis and Christos H. Papadimitriou: Logicomix
: Cartoon on Bertrand Russel's contribution to mathematical logic. Easy read,
sometimes inaccurate. The best part was the notebook at the end. The best idea
is that logic with invalid premises is dangerous.

- 2021-02-13 J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows
: It's all explained

- 2021-02-10 J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
: Snape dispatches Dumbledore

- 2021-02-06 J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
: DA

- 2021-01-16 J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
: But why did Barty Crouch, impersonating Mad-Eye Moody, teach Harry how to
handle the Imperius curse?

- 2021-01-16 J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
: It has a very happy ending.

- 2021-01-01 J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
: Oh well, a quick read.

