---
layout: post
title: 'Chess notes'
categories: chess concepts
---

Things I wish I knew when I was a child about the game of chess.

Recently I took on playing chess a bit. I used to play chess as a kid and
that’s useful as I know some basics, but as a grown up I find myself
approaching it differently, noticing things I wish I knew as a child.

**There are not so many squares.** Sure, there's 64 of them, but (with reference to
the starting position):
- there is a white king on `e1`
- and a pawn in front of it on `e2`
- the pawn can move to `e3` or `e4`
- and then the same for black king and pawn
- and then the same for queens

and we've covered a quarter of the board.


The same applies to moves: given a position, **there are not that many good
moves**. Especially at the beginning, most pieces can't event move, apart from
pawns and knights, and not all the moves are good, hence the study of openings.


Moves fall into three categories:
- preserve balance
- tiny change of balance
- decisive blow

the last one usually happens either because the opponent did a mistake, or
after a **chain of tiny changes of balance**.


Some positions have multiple choices that are relatively balanced, but
sometimes the there is a single next good move.


Learning **openings** can be done in two different ways:
- go through each case encyclopedically (the know it all version)
- or know little (focus on the core ideas an principles)

or more likely something in between, but without having an idea of openings you
start on a back foot.


That's because **in a given position one player usually has initiative/tempo**,
further restricting the choices of the other player. E.g. if the white starts
with `e4`, for black out of the not so many moves possible at the start, also
`Nf6` is not such a good idea, white can start chasing it with the pawn on
`e5`, leading to a tiny change of balance favouring white.


**Computer plays silly outside the main scenario** of doing the best move:
- When the computer is restricted to play as a lower rating, it sometimes
  randomly choose a "not the best" move. To the computer algorithm, all the bad
  ideas are equally bad, but a human of a certain level will not play certain
  bad ideas.
- In particular if I tried to play end-games e.g. my king vs computer's king a
  pawn, the computer might not put a fight because it looks at the position, it
  assesses that it's a draw if played well, therefore it happily just looses
  the pawn to get to the draw, instead of trying to put a fight.
- When I played bad moves, the computer assumed a lower rating, adjusted for it
  lowering it's rating, but when I sprung back, it did not adjust up
  accordingly.
- I also saw online a case where the human player was doing nonsense,
  non-aggressive moves, the computer then reciprocated instead of continuing
  the attack.
- At endish games, some computer moves are weird, especially when playing
  computer vs. computer, it plays such that some advantage is only visible many
  moves later.
