---
layout: post
title: 'The Intelligent Investor - reading notes'
categories: review book
---

Despite the cheesy title, "The Intelligent Investor" by Benjamin Graham is one
of the best investing books (if read carefully)


# Reading carefully

I first read this book about 20 years ago. While I got some out of it at the
time, I found that reading it again now, something clicked and I find the
advice in the book actionable (directly useful to understand finance and
investing).

These are my (incomplete) notes of this second reading.


# Scope

The author makes it clear that it only covers investing in marketable
securities, there are other areas of personal finance such as mortgages which
are not in scope. It also does not cover the details of security analysis, the
author has another book on that subject. But it covers the ideas behind
personal investment, and for that the book comes highly recommended by Warren
Buffett.


# Relevance of history

The book had multiple editions from 1949 to 1972. On the first read I found
confusing that the securities it mentions are historical, e.g. companies I've
never heard of. Now I understand, from one of Warren Buffett's talks, that over
a timespan of decades even large companies come and go, that's how it is. Also
Graham shows that the market has different patterns over long periods of time:
it might be cyclical, it might be generally cheap, it might be generally
expensive, low or high inflation. These historical notes are important for
several reasons. The market might match a previous historical pattern or it
might be different, e.g. today's market is different from the general aversion
to company shares in 1949, requiring adjustments to the investment strategy.

The concrete examples of securities are not to be taken as actionable today
necessarily, but as similar circumstances that might occur in the future,
though the available kinds of securities vary in time and by location, e.g.  US
saving bonds series E @5.20% or similar are not available in the UK in 2022,
but things might be different in a high inflation environment.

Also it's important to know the kind of fluctuations to expect for a class of
securities over time, e.g. second-grade bonds might be available at a discount.

There are stories about Graham's "cigar butt" approach to shares, but clearly
the ethos of the book is that the investing principles must adapt rationally to
the concrete financial climate, not a one size fits all approach.


# Definitions

The book has several important and memorable definitions.

Foremost is the definition of **investment as "an operation [...] which, upon
thorough analysis promises safety of principal and an adequate return.
Operations not meeting these requirements are speculative."**

This is the kind of definition that shows that a high IQ is less important in
investing compared with being emotionally wise and remembering to evaluate each
deal against this definition.

An example of a recurring situation is the misuse of terms in the media, which
often applies it to any actor in the market. E.g. "reckless investors" is a
contradiction by the definition above, akin to "spendthrift misers".

Risk is also singled out as a word that gets misinterpreted as volatility. I
noticed that myself in 2003, when the fact that the shares of a company dropped
suddenly made them safer at the cheaper price, despite the increased
volatility.

Graham goes further and questions the assumption that risk and reward go hand
in hand with the security type, shares purchased cheaper have lower risk and
higher reward potential, the risk/reward ratio is not inherent to a security
type.

Not quite definitions, but with regards to various advisors he points to
potential conflicts of interest, biases (e.g. toward speculation) or
misinformation (e.g. buy or sell guidance regardless of price).


# Defensive vs enterprising investors

The book caters largely for two investor scenarios.

The defensive investor aims to get average returns with minimal effort. The
enterprising investor aims to beat the market, but with a significant amount of
time spent understanding it, just a bit won't do it, there is no middle route
that would beat the market somewhat with a medium effort.  Importantly, both
should avoid serious mistakes and losses.

For both it recommends a bonds/cash to shares ratio of about 50-50, no less
than 25, no more than 75 of either. He gives ample reasoning based on the
historical context, the actual ratio one should employ depends on
circumstances. Warren Buffett is often questioned about his cash holdings, this
recommendation gives some explanation.

For the defensive investor he recommends high grade bonds and shares in between
10 to 30 (adequate, but not excessive diversification) large, conservatively
financed companies with a long history of dividend payment, bought at a
reasonable price.

For the enterprising investor he comes to the "following logical if
disconcerting conclusion: To enjoy a reasonable chance for continued better
than average results, the enterprising investor must follow policies which are
(1) inherently sound and promising, and (2) are not popular in Wall Street."
This explains Warren Buffett's investment in Coca-Cola avoiding the computer
industry.


# Putting it together

The book has a section on results to be expected by the defensive investor, in
the 1970s US. At the time one could get a good return on US bonds compared with
shares that were relatively overvalued. The author recommended a 50-50 split
and gave an estimation of the expected results. How does this apply to 2022
(summer) Britain? Well, one could get 1.2% on savings, while a FTSE 100 index
would give 4% in dividends with a P/E ratio of 14, i.e. about 7%, resulting in
an additional 3% capital growth. So for a split of 25-75 of savings to shares a
defensive investor could expect to get about 5.5% before tax.

Another interesting recent development (autumn 2022) was the announcement of
the (now ousted) British chancellor of a decrease in taxes. The market reacted
with the expectation of higher borrowing costs for Britain that were previously
at historical lows. The consequence was drop in prices of long term bonds. The
Bank of England intervened to purchase such long term bonds (presumably at high
prices) to prop up pension funds. Why would any sane investor go for long term
bonds that pay historically low interest. The answer is that the said
institutional investors don't invest their own money and get away with it, the
Bank of England saving them so that it continues to have them of buyers in the
future. But that's not a prudent investment attitude for the intelligent
investor that invests their own money and cannot expect a saving grace.

The other observation is that what there are times where a clear calculation
can be made (summer 2022), and times where such clear calculation can't me
made (autumn 2022).


# Growth stocks and IPOs

Obvious prospects of growth for an industry do not necessarily translate into
profits. The growth expectation is often priced in. Also it's hard to
anticipate the future market leader in such an industry.

IPOs often come to the market in periods of enthusiasm and are priced
optimistically to the seller's advantage.


# Don'ts

The book contains plenty of advice on what not to do:
- don't speculate and kid yourself that you're investing
- don't speculate seriously with more money than you can afford to loose
- don't borrow to invest, including dealing on margin or shorting though this
  advice is given for circumstances where caution is required, one might decide
  differently in other circumstances e.g. house mortgage nowadays
- don’t double count the impact of management if that’s already priced in the
  earnings history
- don't trade safety of principal for a small increase in bond interest


# The importance of psychology

The Intelligent Investor" is a rich source of ideas on the importance of
psychology in 

Say you ignore the advice of the book and you purchase shares because they went
up. The reality is that shares are likely to be available at a cheaper price
(shorter) after purchase. When you see them going down then what are you going
to do? If the purchase was made based on thorough rational analysis, the
process can be repeated ("Did I miss anything?") and more shares can be bought,
potentially on better terms.

Ironically Warren Buffett also tells the story when he missed the
opportunity of going big on Walmart because he purchased some, price went a bit
up and he waited for the price to go lower than his initial purchase, but then
this never happened. So chances are shares will likely be available at a
cheaper price shorter after purchase, but this is not guaranteed.

Also the book warns against short selling. There might be special circumstances
where that might make sense e.g. when a company wholly owns another, there
might be some arbitrage case where short selling can be combined with a long
position against basically the same asset. But other than these kind of
situations, short selling does not make sense also including for the reason
that it requires infinite patience. Even the "cigar-butt" approach: "buying a
neglected and therefore undervalued issue for profit generally proves a
protracted and patience-trying experience".

Another example is the expectation of meaningful return on investment, the idea
of having patience to find a good opportunity (e.g. with a large margin of
safety) and having the energy to stay put in the meantime.


# Formula based investing

There are many formulas that don't work, particularly the kind that buy shares
because they went up and sell because they went down.

But some work, such as:
- invest regularly to achieve "dollar cost averaging"
- keep the cash or shares holdings in the 25 to 75 percent range

He does provide a valuation formula, see comments in the next section.

# Valuation

Two-part appraisal process:
- evaluate the value based on past performance
- adjust based on anticipated changes 

He provides a formula: value = earnings * (8.5 + 2 * (expected annual growth ratio))

Now the theory is that the value of a company is the sum of all the income
received (as dividends and maybe eventual sale) discounted to account for the
fact that money received later is worth less than money in hand today. This is
the basis of models like Dividend Discount Model or Discounted Cash Flow. While
theoretically true, there are issues with this kind of models. One is that the
theoretical value could be infinite on paper which is unrealistic. The other is
that it is relatively easy to plonk it into a spreadsheet formula and come with
some magic number, becoming overly technical hiding the fact that there are
many assumptions such as the holding period, the price a buyer might want to
pay, the earnings growth etc. Warren Buffett talked that while the idea is
sound, if you have to do such a calculation the stock is not cheap enough.

We can debate if Graham's formula is any better and an in-depth analysis of it
would be interesting, but it has some positive characteristics. It ends with a
finite value. It is relatively simple so the assumptions can be accounted for
better (e.g. what's a realistic growth rate to expect, what's the 8.5 etc.).

Note that the formula does not talk about the PE ratio, accounting for the
capital structure of the company (two companies with same earnings might have
the same value, but the share price needs to account for the long term
liabilities).

Interesting example of ALCOA in chapter 12 about the unreliability of stated
earnings. In that case the reported earnings per share have a footnote
reference indicating that the earnings do not include “special charges” some of
which were provisions for future years without a clear breakdown as to how much
for which year etc.

“Eventually the intelligent analyst will confine himself to those groups in
which the future appears reasonably predictable, or where the margin of safety
of past-performance value over current price is so large that he can take his
chances on future variations”


# Chapter 8 and 20
TODO

# Reference

Benjamin Graham: "The Intelligent Investor" 1973

