---
layout: post
title: '2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine'
categories: politics ukraine
---

Thoughts on what's going on in Ukraine

Today there was a parade for "Victory Day" in Moscow and Putin laid flowers to
a Soviet times monument for the towns that suffered during the Nazi invasion in
the Second World War, the Hero Cities, including Kiev and Odessa, while the
very same day his Russian army was bombing the very same towns, in a war that
he started 75 days ago. What a farce.

The human suffering that he's causing is horrible, he deserves to be punished,
but the reality is that no punishment for him will equal the pain and damage
that he caused: deaths, bombings, destruction, torture, rapes, thefts, millions
of people displaced. It's going to be long. Putin is in his 70s, this might
take 20 years to solve.

On the surface it does not make sense. Russia is the aggressor, no one was
attacking it. Also Russia has a demographic problem of a large country with a
decreasing population, sending young men to die will only make it worse.

The true rationale for his actions is the survival of his political regime: use
war and violence to scare everyone, concerned that otherwise the Russians will
protest and remove him from power. They've seen recently that people in Belarus
protested against the fake election, they send their armies there to maintain
the local dictator, but their concern is that they are next. Underlying it is
the nostalgia of the former KBG of their good times in East Germany as
projection of the Soviet 

The Russian propaganda is caught in irrational contradictions. E.g. one
refutation to the Ukrainian sinking of the Russian flagship in the Black Sea
was that it was a triggered by an accident on board: in other words it was not
the Ukrainians, the Russian navy was plain incompetent.

The Russian propaganda is aimed to two audiences.

First to the population of Russia it aims to deal with the problem of lack of
support. It does not call it a war, but a special operation. The downside is
that it is clear to the Russian soldiers in Ukraine that they are lied to,
lowering their morale further. Another example if the denazification story, a
attempt to give it some legitimacy, that again is idiotic, the Ukrainian
president is Jewish, how can he be a Nazi? This misinterpretation of meaning of
words is truly Orwellian.

Second to the population of the Western world, the Russian propaganda tries to
aim with aims to brake the resolve in helping the Ukrainians by: threatening
with atomic weapons, picking smaller targets to intimidate (e.g. via threats to
cut gas supplies) and propagating myths. In particular that inaction would be
beneficial (it would be to Putin, that's true), that it's NATO's fault, that
providing weapons to Ukraine prolongs the conflict, ignoring that Russia can
very easily stop the conflict itself. The idea of letting Russia invade
countries was tried after War War II and none of the invaded countries liked
it.

It will be a long conflict, but in fact, Putin has already lost. Ukrainians
will never forget and forgive the Russian invasion, and Putin's legacy will be
that of a minor KBG agent turned grand scale criminal. It did not had to be
this way, but he found that reforming Russia would remove him from power, so
instead he decided to become a dictator.
