---
layout: post
title: "Dedekind cuts"
categories: maths logic
---

Describing real numbers in terms of natural numbers

{% include mathjax.html %}

# Introduction

One can describe real numbers using Euclidian geometry as follows. Take a line.
Take a point on the line, that point, the origin, corresponds to $$0$$. Take
another point, that point corresponds to $$1$$ and defines a unit of
measurement and direction. Then $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$ corresponds to a point halfway between
$$0$$ and $$1$$, and $$\sqrt{2}$$ corresponds to a point at about $$1.4142...$$.

While the geometric approach works for practical applications, it raises a
chicken and egg question. What comes first? Numbers or geometry?

Dedekind, in the 19th century, came with an ingenious device to think of the
real numbers in terms of the natural numbers, which contributed to the
arithmetization of analysis.


# Things and numbers

Numbers are a creation of the human mind, based on the ability to identify
separate things, give them labels, recognise when we face the same thing again
or a different thing, and relate things to other things.

Concretely, when faced with three sheep and three trees, we can recognise each
sheep and tree as a distinct thing, we can tether each sheep to a tree forming
pairs and conclude that each sheep and tree belongs to exactly one such pairs.
Should one sheep free itself we can still conclude that it's the same sheep,
and it's not one of the others still tethered to the trees. We can come with
the word "three" as a label for situations when we can do this very specific
pairing between distinct things.


# Natural numbers

We start with zero and a relation of _successor_ (or _next_, or _follows_). For
example 1 is the successor of 0, 2 is the successor of 1 (also 2 is the
successor of the successor of 0) and so on. This requires from the human mind
the idea of going on forever: the idea of infinity.

A acute observer would question: how do we know that it does not loop at some
point? This can be addressed with rules such:
- zero is not the successor of another natural number.
- if the successor of two numbers are the same, then those numbers are the
  same.

The first rule ensures that the loop does not happen at zero. It also guards
against the situation that we'll see with integers where negative numbers
precede zero. The second rule ensures that there is no loop later by ensuring
that (other than zero) a natural number is the successor of just another
natural number.

Then the acute observer can say: hey, but in addition to the chain of numbers
generated from zero, there could be other chains of loops. This can be
addressed by saying that for the natural numbers they all have to belong to the
chain of generated by the successor from zero, there are no other natural
numbers.

And with this our detailed definition of the natural numbers is complete. We
can then define:
- addition as repeated application of the successor
- multiplication as the repeated application of the addition
- exponentiation as the repeated application of the multiplication

And these operations have the nice property that applying them to natural
numbers results in a natural number.

However the counterpart operations (subtraction, division, root) are more
complicated.


# Integers

Take subtraction for example. When faced with $$3 - 5$$ we could say it's
impossible, because if there are three people in a bus, you can't have five get
off the bus at the next stop. But what if we wanted to be able to do such
operations to handle the money of an account getting into debit. Then we need
negative numbers.

Formally we can introduce a new system of numbers that consists of a pair of
sign and a natural number. For the sign we need thee things/values: positive,
negative and none. Only zero can and must have no sign ("none" value for sign).

To the natural number 3, we can put in correspondence the integer 3, but they
are distinct entities, the integers are pairs of a sign and a natural number,
in this particular case for the integer 3 we talk of a pair where the sign is
positive and the natural number in the pair is 3.


# Rational numbers

This leads to division. When faced with trying to divide 1 into 2 parts we
could either say it's impossible, as is the case of the child of divorcing
parents, but we might want to be able to do so when sharing a cake.

Formally we can introduce a new system of numbers that consist of triplets of a
sign and two natural numbers (the numerator and denominator). We still have the
restriction that the denominator cannot be zero, but other than that now also
divisions are possible between arbitrary numbers.

When we write a fraction like $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$, we think of a triplet where the
sign is positive, the first natural number of the triplet is 1, and the second
natural number of the triplet is 2.


# Real numbers

This leads to the counterpart of exponentiation. Take square root for example.

We know since the ancient Greeks that any rational numbers have a common
measure. For example for $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$ and $$\dfrac{2}{3}$$ the common
measure is $$\dfrac{1}{6}$$. But also from the ancient Greeks we know that the
side of the square and it's diagonal do not have a common measure. If the side
is of length $$1$$, the diagonal is $$\sqrt{2}$$ which is not a rational
number, it's irrational.

To avoid falling back to geometrical descriptions, Dedekind's idea is to define
the real numbers (rational and irrational numbers) as follows.

A real number is a pair of infinite sets of rational numbers such that all
the rational numbers from the first set are smaller than the rational numbers
from the second set and together the two sets comprise all the rational
numbers. Thus the set of the rational numbers is cut into two to define a real
number: the Dedekind cut.

Concretely for $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$ the first set contains all the rationals
smaller than $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$, the second set contains all the rationals
greater than $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$. As for $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$ we can choose to put it
in either set (where it acts as either the greatest or the smallest number in
the set).

For $$\sqrt{2}$$ the first set contains all the negative rationals and all
positive rationals of which square is smaller than $$2$$, while the second set
contains all the positive rationals of which square is greater than $$2$$. But
neither of the two sets has a greatest or smallest number in the set.

While in the case of $$\dfrac{1}{2}$$ we put a rational in correspondence with
a real number, the rational is a triplet of sign and two natural numbers, while
the real number is pair of infinite sets of rational numbers.


# Complex numbers

This leads to the question of taking square root of negative numbers. Again we
can take the view that it's not possible or we define new kinds of numbers
where the operation is possible.

Enter the complex numbers that are defined as pairs of real numbers. The first
number is called the real part, the second number is the imaginary part. Both
components of a complex number are pairs of infinite sets of rational numbers,
which themselves are triplets of sign and two natural numbers.


# Conclusion

This approach, particularly the ingenuous definition of real numbers by
Dedekind cuts achieve definitions that do not rely on geometry.

But while we started on a solid footing observing the ability of the human mind
to identify different things, it then introduced as a base for numbers ideas of
sets and in particular treating the infinite as an actual thing as is the case
for the definition of a real number as a pair of infinite sets.


# References

R. Dedekind: Continuity and Irrational Numbers (1872)

