---
layout: post
title: 'begin()'
categories: coding cpp
---

C++ standard library variations on obtaining the start iterator for a sequence
(as of C++20-ish). Not all the `begin()`s are the same.


# The good

## std::vector, the canonical case

The vector has a member method `begin()` that returns an iterator, The iterator
wraps a pointer, the pointer points to the first value in the underlying array
(assuming the vector is not empty). That iterator can be used to point to other
values in the underlying array and get a reference to read or write those
values.

What if the vector is `const`? The design decision for `std::vector` was to
make it a regular type, hence it should behave like `int`, hence a `const
std::vector` should not allow you to change its values. That's why we have
`std::vector<int>` and `const std::vector<int>`, but rarely `std::vector<const
int>`.

Therefore the vector has two `begin()` member methods:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
template<typename T>
class vector
{
// lots of other details skipped ...
  constexpr iterator begin() noexcept {
    return iterator(begin_);
  }
  constexpr const_iterator begin() const noexcept {
    return const_iterator(begin_);
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

For a `const` vector, the additional `begin() const` member method will be
selected by the compiler. That `begin()` returns a `const_iterator`, which
gives a reference to the `const` value, therefore through the `const_iterator`
we can read the value, but not modify it.

Later the vector got a `cbegin()` member method:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
template<typename T>
class vector
{
// lots of other details skipped ...
  constexpr const_iterator cbegin() const noexcept {
    return begin();
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

The intent for that member method is to obtain a `const_iterator` when you have
a non-const vector.

A similar situation is for the end of the sequence with two member methods for
`end()` and also a `cend()` member method.

From the point of the user one can mix and match comparing `iterator`s with
`const_iterator`s, which is handy, but results in a large number of functions
to write by the implementer of the container (albeit all these functions have
simple implementations).


## std::string catchup

`std::string` is a much older type than `std::vector`. From that older history
it has member methods like `find` that return positions, with a special value
`npos` for "not found".

When large parts of STL such as `vector` where added to the standard library,
`std::string` was retrofitted to have member methods like `begin` and `cbegin`
just like the `vector`.


## array and standalone functions

The array however does not have member functions. So then standalone template
functions were added for `begin`, `end`, `size`. The syntax through which they
take the array is a bit surprising at first, but other than that the
implementation is straight forward:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
template<class T, std::size_t N>
T * begin(T (&array)[N]) {
    return array;
}

template<class T, std::size_t N>
T * end(T (&array)[N]) {
    return array + N;
}

template<class T, std::size_t N>
size_t size(T (&array)[N]) {
    return N;
}
{% endhighlight %}

And overloads were created to call the member functions e.g. `begin()`
otherwise, so that you can use the free function `std::begin` with both arrays
or containers.


## "for" loops

With that we can loop:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
for (std::vector<int>::iterator it = vec.begin();
     it != vec.end();
     ++it) {
  // dereference it to either read or change values
}
{% endhighlight %}

The whole `std::vector<int>::iterator is a mouthfull, especially when using
`cbegin`:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
for (std::vector<int>::const_iterator it = vec.cbegin();
     it != vec.cend();
     ++it) {
  // dereference it to read values, but can't change values
}
{% endhighlight %}

`auto` can simplify such loops:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
for (auto it = vec.begin(); it != vec.end(); ++it) {
  // dereference it to either read or change values
}
{% endhighlight %}

And range-based for loops were introduced to simplify theese common scenarios
further:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
for (const auto & value : vec) {
  // read value
}
// or if needed
for (auto & value : vec) {
  // read or change value
}
{% endhighlight %}

The range-based for loops rely on the free functions `std::begin` and
`std::end`.


# The bad and the ugly

# std::filesystem::directory_iterator

`std::filesystem::directory_iterator` is called an "iterator", and yet it can
be used in a range-based for loop to iterate through files in a folder as
below:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
for (const auto & dir_entry : directory_iterator("C:\\Some folder")) {
  std::cout << dir_entry.path() << '\n';
}
{% endhighlight %}

The reason it gives access to a directory entry rather than just the path is
that the OS APIs it uses, e.g. `FindFirstFileExW` and `FindNextFileW` in
Windows, also return file attribute, not just the file names.

To do so it has member functions `begin()` and `end()` which each return ...
drum rolls ... a `directory_iterator`. `begin()` just returns a copy, while the
`end()` returns a default constructed one. This ends up roughly equivalent to:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
for (auto it = directory_iterator("C:\\Some folder");
     it != directory_iterator();
     ++it) {
  std::cout << it->path() << '\n';
}
{% endhighlight %}

The `directory_iterator` is a weird type: it started life as something close to
an iterator, then become more like a range, while it preserved the old name.
The design/documentation also forces the storage of the handle returned from
e.g.  `FindFirstFileExW` in a heap allocated, reference counted location. Also
its end iterator predates ideas of a sentinel for determining if we reached
the end.

Dereferencing the `directory_iterator` gives access to a `const
std::filesystem::directory_entry`, so in a way it's a const iterator, but while
it has a `begin()`, it does not currently have a `cbegin()`.


# std::string_view

A `string_view` gives read only access to a memory contiguous range of
characters. That allows some unification for functions that take either string
literals or `std::string` (and [do not care about zero
termination][string-view]), so the access has to be read only to accomodate
literals.

As for the range, it typically stores two pointers and returns the first as the
`begin()` and the last as the `end()`. But the iterators it returns are const
iterators, and its `cbegin()` returns the same const iterator.


# std::span

But what if you want access to a memory contiguous range of values, not
necessarily characters (so not interoperability with `std::string` is required)
and also get write access, not just read?

Enter `std::span`. It derives from a class `gsl::span`, where `gsl` was a
largely Microsoft supported library intended to make things safer.

Like `string_view`, to expose the range, `span` typically stores two pointers
and returns the first as the `begin()` and the last as the `end()`. But the
iterators it returns are NOT const iterators.

And here is where things get an interesting turn. `gsl::span` used to have a
member function `cbegin()` that returned a const iterator. In the process of
standardising the type as `std::span` people noticed that `std::span::cbegin()`
returns a const iterator, but the free standing function `std::cbegin` returns
a mutable iterator (i.e. [different types, see
PL247](https://github.com/cplusplus/nbballot/issues/243)). That's because the
free standing `std::cbegin` just makes the object constant and calls `begin()`
on it, hoping to select the const member function `begin()`.

But `std::span` has issues with constness. As a type it makes sense to model a
pointer where just because the pointer is `const` (shallow), does not mean that
the pointed data is `const` (deep). Its member function `begin()` returns a
non const iterator (allowing to change the pointed data) even if the `span`
object is `const` (can't change the pointers it embeds).

In the rush of standardising `std::span`, its `cbegin()` member function [was
dropped, see LGW3320](https://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/issue3320), though
hopefully these issues will be sorted out (see proposals
[P2278r4](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2022/p2278r4.html)
and
[P2276r1](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2021/p2276r1.pdf)).


## std::generator

`std::generator` is a template type introduced in C++23 to support one of the
usage scenarios of C++ coroutines: generate sequences.

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
std::generator<int> natural_numbers() {
  int crt = 0;
  for(;; ++crt) {
    co_yield crt;
  }
}

void foo() {
  for (const int x : natural_numbers() | std::views::take(10)) {
    std::cout << x << ' ';
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

For the above to work, the `std::generator` implements `begin()` and `end()`,
but: "It is an undefined behavior to call `begin()` more than once on the same
`generator` object."

I suspect this is because like `directory_iterator` manages a resource (the
`HANDLE` returned by `FindFirstFileExW`), the `generator` also manages a
resource  (the coroutine state). The `directory_iterator` made the choice of
using reference counting to manage this resource, making it copyable at
additional cost, while `generator` gives up iterator copy and convenience in
order to avoid that cost.


[string-view]:   {% post_url 2018-11-15-string-view-corners %}
[abseil]: https://abseil.io/blog/20180531-regular-types
