---
layout: post
title: 'Books Read in 2023'
categories: read book
---

List of books I've read in 2023

- 2023-04-12 Herbert A. Simon: Reason in Human Affairs
: Accidental repeat read of the book (first read it in 2018). This time I
thought it was really great. 10 out of 10. It's short: 3 chapters. The first
chapter introduces a description of the process involving human rationality
which is that, other than processes that we handle subconsciously like
breathing, we handle problems one by one in isolation, we generate
alternatives, we stop at the first acceptable alternative (not necessarily the
optimal one). This is similar to Kahneman's system 1 and 2 model. He's got an
idea that this approach works in a mainly empty word where most of the time we
only need to deal with one problem. Chapter 2 talks more about evolution and
how such way of reasoning arises. He spends some time on selfishness vs.
altruism and hits quite a few points on "survival of the fitter, not the
fittest", on ecological niches, on the way variations are created. This chapter
alone was more inspiring than the whole "The Selfish Gene" book. Chapter 3
looks at what it means for the way society is structured, politics, markets and
what can be expected to be sorted by human reason.

- 2023-04-07 Philip A. Fisher: Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits and Other Writings
: Interesting book on investment. The introduction to the book by the son of
the author is worth half of the book (in terms of giving an insight on how the
author really was and the effects of old age and isolation). The interesting
part in the book was the focus on long term company growth and the insights
into the required qualitative investigation to identify such stocks, which is a
good complement to Benjamin Graham's "Intelligent Investor"

