---
layout: post
title: 'Books Read in 2024'
categories: read book
---

List of books I've read in 2024


- 2024-07-31: Victor J. Katz: A History of Mathematics - An Introduction 3rd Edition (2009)
: Very interesting book. It good to know maths theory, but knowing the history
of how we got there is at least about as valuable. From the historic
perspective theory makes sense, history provides the many answers for how the
results were obtained, what avenues were attempted without success, what
motivated the solutions given and for what problems. I acknowledge that I
skimmed over areas where I lacked the maths knowledge to absorb all the details
(it gets a bit complicated in the 20th century in particular).  Personally I
find the history lessons about how flaws were discovered, and how they were
addressed, very useful for critical thinking. Highly recommended. It should be
part of the learning maths curriculum. 9 out of 10.

- 2024-06-01 Daniel Lieberman: Exercised
: The book is written in the style of "enthusiastic Harvard professor" that
reminds me of Pinker. One recurring theme in the book is that some body
processes that are important for our wellbeing are only triggered through
physical activities. In the historical past we would have had plenty of
physical activities, largely unwillingly because we would have rather preserve
calories. In the modern work we live in a calorie rich with plenty of machines
to do work for us. So it's important to exercise for physical and mental
health. It's not easy (we need to make it fun, a habit), but it's easier than
loosing weight.

- 2024-01-25 Alan Turing: "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" (Mind, October 1950)
: Interesting. It describes the imitation game: can a machine impersonate a
human for a dialogue? The article is better at debunking common incorrect
arguments for the negative answer, but quite visionary for the time is was
written.

- 2024-01-24 Rob Eastway and Jeremy Wyndham: Why do buses come in threes?
: Easy maths puzzles book. Children like it.
