---
layout: post
title: 'Hamming ideas'
categories: engineering ideas
---

Ideas from Richard Hamming's 1995 lectures "Learning to learn"

Reference: [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering: Learning to Learn" course by
Dr.  Richard W. Hamming
(1915-1998)](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2FF649D0C4407B30)
(1915-1998) for graduate students at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) in
Monterey, California 1995. http://www.nps.edu/


# Sigmoid

A lot of natural processes follow a sigmoid growth: they start small, then they
grow exponentially, but then eventually they saturate. It's not necessarily a
sigmoid, but has some similar characteristics.


# Every 17 years

Knowledge doubles every 17 years. He does a back of the envelope calculation,
being a mathematician he's very comfortable to use calculus for that. It does
not seem outlandish. One issue is that it currently requires more scientists.
We'll hit a saturation point on that. Consequences are that the areas of
expertise become more specialized and that things are changed technologically
20 years later, you need to come up with new things.


# Early feedback

There is the example of the back of the envelope calculation and later when he
talks about an iterative, agile project management that gives you more
productivity than blindly following a dead end.


# Economic incentives for the development of electronic computers

The 1890s US census, which was by law required every 10 years, was looking to
take more than 10 years to process before a new one is due. This lead to the
development of punch cards, by Herman Hollerith, where holes in the card
indicating say the age or gender could be then used to count. This then
eventually led to IBM.

Then the Manhattan project (and other e.g. calculating tables of ballistic
trajectories for the US army). Imagine large rooms, factory floor size with
rows and rows of, almost always, women doing calculations. Hamming says that
you get a multiplication every 20 seconds, for short periods of time you can
get more, but it's not sustainable (e.g. people get tired, then they do
mistakes, they need a cup of tea, etc.).

It's interesting to think about these people, having a job, earnings, and how
the electronic computers lost these jobs, and how other jobs were created
instead. We're facing today (2026) the same kind if discourse related to AI,
the historical experience says that some jobs will be lost, other jobs will be
created.


# Centralized computers vs. PCs

Computers used to be centralized, expensive, with options to rent time slots
where then utilization factors mattered. AI is currently in a similar early
situation where it's centralized (remote in the cloud), expensive, per-token
costs. Things might change.


# Productivity

He claims that different people have a wide range of productivity for the same
time/effort. He mentions this at the beginning for scientists getting results
and later for some programmers being up to 10 times more productive.


 # Computer says

An image meme was created in February 2026:
- A human tells the computer: say "I am alive"
- Computer responds: I AM ALIVE
- Human reacts: oh my god

In 1995 Hamming mentions that just because the computer displays,prints,says
that it thinks, it's not necessarily so.


# Definition bias

When we ask what is intelligence or thinking, we have a bias, interest, to have
such a definition that it does not answer in the negative about ourselves.


# Meaning

He describes a situation where his wife mentions that it rains. He wonders why
she said that, because he can see that it rains. He then realises that what she
means instead is: "I finished my tea, I'm ready to have a conversation".
