---
layout: post
title: 'Books Read in 2026'
categories: read book
---

List of books I've read in 2026


- 2026-01-31: P. J. O'Rourke: How the Hell Did This Happen?
: Exactly. A humorous take on how the orange baby got in power the first time.
It's not even funny.

- 2026-01-17: J. B. Priestley: An Inspector Calls
: Moralising play written by a socialist soon after the Word War II. Funny to
compare it with Brecht and see the differences between a German socialist and
an English one. The German one is more revolutionary on the lines "in the same
way as science dethrones religion, the workers will overthrow the exploitative
capitalists", while the English one is more "workers should be paid fair wages,
customers should be respectful to shop assistants and everybody should stop
drinking alcohol". The morality of the behaviour of Eva Smith (she happily
accepts money from men that she sleeps with, giving up job searching) is not
questions. There is an English literary tradition to moralize, see Pamela, but
there is also a literary tradition to see through, see Shamela; this play is a
regression. Not bad, but not good: 6 out of 10.

- 2026-01-10: Marcus Aurelius: Meditations
: Re-read, this time in the translation by George Lang, which uses `thou`s and
`doest`s, which on one side it makes it more difficult to read, but it might be
in the spirit of the Meditations which were after all private notes, not public
writing. It still felt repetitive almost like a ritualistic incantation, but in
a enjoyable way.

It occurred me this time how well educated, read, conversed Marcus Aurelius
was. He refers to Epictetus, Socrates, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Hesiod, Homer
etc.  He was born in the elite Roman families around the emperor, so money was
not an objection to give him the best education possible. For example Plutarch
was not available since he died in about 120 CE, around the time when Marcus
Aurelius was born. So when when he remembers Sextus, at the start of the
Meditations in the list of his teachers/role models, he means Sextus of
Chaeronea: i.e. they got him one of Plutarch's grandson or nephew as a tutor.

He's a stoic, though he has a different feel from Epictetus. E.g. instead of
the "shut up and put up with it", it's more about a sense of duty, appreciation
about the bright side of your circumstances (though it's easy to say for him,
he was the Roman emperor), plus not letting your focus be distracted by
unpleasant things that you can't change.

In Romanian literature there is this traditional ballad Miorița, taught in
schools, and there is a whole discussion about the attitude of the character
facing death. I realise that there are parallels with Marcus Aurelius' attitude
to death: do your best in every circumstance, don't fret over death caused by
things you can't control, but this parallel escapes Romanian literature
critics, Marcus Aurelius is not on their reading list.

For him the physical space is composed of the four elements: earth, water, air
and fire organised in sphere, and he mentions Empedocles a pre-Socratic
Sicilian philosopher for the origin of this idea, and the idea spherical
Earth-centric layout of the universe.

He does not believe in life after death, more like Heraclitus, another
pre-Socratic, perishing is just a transformation. Death is a theme to which he
comes repeatedly.

He believes in God enough to be of interest to Christians, which is what
probably helped preserve the book, e.g. the translator mentions Bishop Butler's
related opinions.

Similar to Epictetus, he sees himself part of a larger brotherhood of men.

There are plenty of logical fallacies employed, the most common are: the false
binary option and the false analogy.

Be deliberate about what you do so that you don't have regrets:
> thou doest every act of thy life as if it were the last

Have focus on what you do:
> Do the things external which fall upon thee distract thee? Give thyself time
> to learn something new and good, and cease to be whirled around

He does consider that god/gods might not exist, but finds that troubling so he
goes back to the assumption that it does exist (I find this funny):
> if there are gods, is not a thing to be afraid of, for the gods will not
> involve thee in evil; but if indeed they do not exist, or if they have no
> concern about human affairs, what is it to me to live in a universe devoid of
> goods and devoid of providence? But in truth they do exist,

Though later he does find useful advice for the alternative:

> if there is a god, all is well; and if chance rules, do not though also be
> governed by it

He has seen enough to know that there are no absolute truths:
> Remember that all is opinion

Yes, but some opinions are better (also he has a specific meaning for
"opinion", see below).

We've got a limited time, use it wisely:

> We must make haste then, not only because we are daily nearer to death, but
> also because the conception of things and the understanding of them cease
> first.

The idea of continuous change:

> all these things, which thou seest, change immediately and will no longer be;
> and constantly bear in mind how many of these changes though hast already
> witnessed. The universe is transformation: life is opinion.

Think:

> Hast thou reason? I have. - Why then dost not thou use it?

I don't think he believed in an immortal soul, everything transforms and is
reused:

> If the souls continue to exist, how does the air contain them from eternity?

Be an active listener, see the other side of the argument:

> Accustom thyself to attend carefully to what is said by another, and as much
> as it is possible, be in the speaker's mind.

About happiness:

> very little indeed is necessary for living a happy life. [...] nor in life be
> so busy as to have no leisure

Practice makes perfect:

> Practice thyself even in the things which thou despairest of accomplishing.
> For even the left hand, which is ineffectual for all other things for want of
> practice, holds the bridle more vigorously than the right hand; for it has
> been practised into this.

I find that I've read many books recently, Meditations being one of them, that
on one side contain a lot of nonsense, but on the other side, though active
reading, I can get a lot of value out of them as well.
